I was the summer warden at Kemlin in 1994.
And I'm looking at a picture from then
of somebody looking out at the turns from the ridge
and they're lying down on the shingle,
looking up over the top of the ridge.
And as I remember, that was mostly what we used to do then.
And it makes me think about how the shape of the ridge
has changed.
And I know the ridge has always changed over time
and it was created in the 19th century by a storm.
And it's always been a kind of dynamic thing anyway.
But looking at this picture brings back the memory
of a ridge that had a different kind of profile
and there were other changes associated with that.
I can't remember who this guy was.
I think he was one of the people that came
and helped volunteer for a day.
And we're looking out at the turn islands.
But I think one thing that people sometimes say
and that I certainly notice as someone who's been
going back to Kenlin for many, many years
and people who come back after time,
they feel that the ridge,
that you somehow are closer to the turns than you used to be.
And I think that's actually the case.
I think the ridge is moving slowly inland
only by a matter of inches each year, perhaps.
But as well as that phenomenon,
there's also the thing of how the ridge is shaped
by particular weather patterns that you get,
particularly what winter storms you get
and what direction they come from.
That can really change the shape of the ridge.
And I think my sense is that now the ridge,
there's very little space between the top of the ridge
and the high tide mark.
That is, once you get to the high tide mark,
you're basically almost at the top of the ridge
and there's not much space in between.
And that's got implications both for how people access,
where you put the rope line to keep people
on the seawood side of the ridge
and also for what ground nesting birds make use of the ridge
because back in 1994 when I was the warden,
we had both several pairs of nesting ring plovers
on the ridge, some oyster catchers nesting on the ridge
and also at that time, some Arctic terns still nesting
on the ridge itself.
And that's a change from now.
Now we don't really have,
I don't think we had any successful ground nesters
on the ridge last summer.
I think we had a couple of pairs.
We've had some ring plovers nesting on the truyn
or trying to in recent years,
but not on the ridge as far as I know successfully.
And certainly the terns haven't even tried to nest
on the ridge for many years.
And I'm wondering whether this is related to the shape
of the ridge and also perhaps increased visitor pressure,
visitors and dogs just because they're close
to where the birds want to nest.
And that space between the top of the high tide mark
and the top of the ridge has also been squeezed
just by the effect of probably of sea level rise,
which is to do with climate change we know.
And this sort of incremental effect of that,
but also perhaps the effect on weather patterns.
And I think in the last,
my sense is in the last sort of five or 10, five years,
there's been more winter storms
that have come from different directions.
So we've had these north or northeasterly storms,
which goes straight into Kremlin
because Kemenin's kind of faces,
the bay itself is kind of open
to the northeasterly direction from the open sea.
And that meant that the ridge has been,
has taken more of a battering from that direction
and has even been overtopped by a couple of particularly,
you know, ferocious winter storms.